[Michael] While I was at
the Primate Research Institute
learning about
Dr. Tetsuro Matsuzawa's
memory studies,
I was introduced
to graduate student Jie Gao,
who is studying chimpanzees'
ability to understand
complex relationships
between objects
in order to learn more
about their cognitive
capabilities.
In her research,
Gao has been able to train
the chimps to understand
and correctly choose
the winning hand
in the classic schoolyard
game of Rock, Paper, Scissors.
How long did it take
for them to learn that?
I think it's about
300 sessions.
With what,
one session a day?
-We have three sessions a day.
-Ah, okay.
-Hundred days. Three months.
-A hundred days' about three
months.
Um, what made you want to do
Rock, Paper, Scissors
in the first place?
[Gao] I'm interested in whether
they could learn
the circular relationship.
And the Rock, Paper, Scissors
game is three elements,
so it's the simplest
circular relationship.
[Matsuzawa speaking]
[Michael] Rare? Yeah.
-And it seems like they do.
She's doing
really well at this.
-Yes.
-Faster than I could do it.
Now I haven't trained
for hundreds of trials,
but before I can even
figure out which one
I would tap,
she's already picked correctly.
Yeah, I think they kind of
react quicker than humans.
Also, in Professor Matsuzawa's
numerical task, they also--
-They don't wait.
-They do it very quickly.
-[Gao] The accuracy is 94%.
-[Matsuzawa] 94.
94 %. That's incredible.
-It's only three errors.
-Three errors.
-[Matsuzawa] Out of 48.
-[Gao] 48 trials.
So another session
is for human hands.
This is another variation
of Rock, Paper, Scissors.
-Yeah. Now these
are human hands.
-Yes.
And at first, did you notice
a difference in ability
to distinguish
the Rock, Paper, Scissors
symbols
with a chimp hand
or a human hand?
[Gao] Well at first,
we trained, a chimpanzee hand.
After he learn it,
we trained with human hand.
-[buzzer]
-And surprisingly--
-She got one wrong.
-Yeah. --they didn't  get it,
because for humans,
it's easy for us to know
that, for example,
the paper--human paper--
and chimpanzee paper,
-they are in the same shape,
-Right.
but chimpanzees,
they don't seem to get it.
[Matsuzawa speaking]
Yeah.
[Michael]
Yeah, and so the next step,
obviously,
is just playing
Rock, Paper, Scissors
- Oh, yes.
-against another chimp
or against me.
Yeah,
that's a plan.
Well, do you think
that because Aye has learned
a circular relationship
and has connected a chimp
and a human hand,
kind of abstract category thing,
that she's traded off
anything that she used to be
good at and now isn't?
-Good question.
-[Gao] Yeah.
[both laugh]
[both] Hmm...
-Future research.
-Yes.